BLOG: How scikit-lego became dataframe-agnostic using Narwhals (#846)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/scikit-lego-narwhals.md

---
title: 'How Narwhals and scikit-lego came together to enable dataframe-agnosticism'
authors: [marco-gorelli]
published: May 26, 2024
description: 'And how your library can become dataframe-agnostic too'
category: [PyData ecosystem]
---

# How scikit-lego became dataframe-agnostic

> Scikit-lego is a Python project which provides extra building blocks on top of scikit-learn.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Scikit-lego](https://github.com/koaning/scikit-lego) is a Python project which provides extra building blocks on top of [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/).
```

> It provides some extra functionality such as `TimeGapSplit` and `add_lags` which may be considered

Reviewer: Might be nice to show the big guns and some stats here? I think our grouped estimators are probably the most popular features, and it could also be good to emphesize that it's not a small project. 

#### So maybe something like:

Scikit-lego is a Python project from the scikit-learn ecosystem that contributes extra estimators for machine-learning pipelines. It's a relatively popular project with over 1000 Github stars and 20,000 downloads a month. It's popularity comes from industry as many of the tools that it provides aren't proven to be state-of-the-art, but fall a bit more in the 'tricks that work' category. These features include a [GroupedEstimator](https://koaning.github.io/scikit-lego/user-guide/meta-models/#grouped-prediction) which can effectively run full pipelines split per subset, a [TimeGapSplit](https://koaning.github.io/scikit-lego/user-guide/cross-validation/#timegapsplit) cross validator for timeseries that adds a gap between train and test set and a whole suite of techniques that leverage [mixture methods](https://koaning.github.io/scikit-lego/user-guide/mixture-methods/) for outlier detection and non-linear classification.

Recently, because polars has been gaining traction, the library maintainers have been looking for a simple way to support multiple dataframe implementations. The project still wants to support pandas, but it would be a shame if newer dataframes couldn't be supported.

Enter narwhals. As of scikit-lego 0.9.0 ...

too niche for scikit-learn itself. These functions have always only ever supported pandas...up until now!

As of scikit-lego 0.9.0, you can also pass dataframes from Polars, Modin, cuDF, and in principle a whole host
of other dataframes.
But, how does it work? Why did they use Narwhals?
Why don't they just
convert to pandas internally on the user's behalf?

We'll start by answering these questions, and will end with some hopes for the future.

## How does it work?

> Let's take a look at `sklego.pandas_utils.add_lags`. The code before version 0.9.0 did something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at `sklego.pandas_utils.add_lags` as a tangible example that demonstrates how you might be able to leverage narwhals in your own code. The code before version 0.9.0 did something like this:
```

Reviewer: This also reminds me, we probably want to rename that section of the API.

- check if the input is NumPy or a pandas dataframe
- if it's NumPy, then perform array operations
- if it's pandas, then perform pandas dataframe operations

> In order to support Polars too, one possible solution could have been do add a third step to

Reviewer 2: "one possible solution could have been do add" - should be "to add"

the above:

- if it's Polars, then perform Polars dataframe operations

> This looks simple, but it actually opens up a rabbit-hole of extra steps, such as:

Reviewer 2: Quibble: standard usage is "rabbit hole", even though you're right that we usually hyphenate when using a noun as an adjective!

> - check if the input is NumPy or a pandas dataframe
> - if it's NumPy, then perform array operations
> - if it's pandas, then perform pandas dataframe operations
> 
> In order to support Polars too, one possible solution could have been to add a third step to
> the above:
> 
> - if it's Polars, then perform Polars dataframe operations
> 
> This looks simple, but it actually opens up a rabbit hole of extra steps, such as:
> 
> - if it's Modin, ...
> - if it's cuDF, ...
> - if it's fireducks, ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. check if the input is NumPy or a pandas dataframe
2. if it's NumPy, then perform array operations
3. if it's pandas, then perform pandas dataframe operations

In order to support Polars too, one possible solution could have been to add a third step to
the above:

4. if it's Polars, then perform Polars dataframe operations

This looks simple, but it actually opens up a rabbit hole of extra steps, such as:

5. if it's Modin, ...
6. if it's cuDF, ...
7. if it's fireducks, ...
```

Reviewer: Adding numbers might help emphesize how many steps we're talking here. The rendering of these numbers may depend on your markdown backend tho

In order to address all the above, scikit-lego opted for a simpler approach: use Narwhals.
The steps then become:

- run `narwhals.from_native` on the input
- express the dataframe logic using the subset of the Polars API supported by Narwhals

Like this, Narwhals takes care of translating its (Polars-like) syntax to each
supported backend. Read the [Narwhals docs](https://narwhals-dev.github.io/narwhals) for more
info on how to use it, and for a tutorial.

## Why not "just convert to pandas"?

There are different ways of converting non-pandas input to pandas. Rather than using Narwhals,
couldn't scikit-lego just have done something like:

- if the input is pandas, keep as-is
- if the input is a non-pandas dataframe, then convert to pandas

However, even in the best-case zero-copy-conversion scenario, this presents several issues:

- once the input has been converted to pandas, there's no standardised way of converting back to
  the original dataframe library.
- using pandas as an engine may be significantly slower than doing everything using the original
  dataframe

Furthermore, converting to pandas may present a cost - for example, if you start with a Polars

> LazyFrame, then you're required to call `.collect` on it before converting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LazyFrame, which can run significantly faster because it delays reading data into memory, then you're required to call `.collect` on it before converting
```

> to pandas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to pandas. Effectively, that would remove all the benefit of using a `LazyFrame` in the first place!
```

Author: not totally sure about this one - I mean:
```python
df = pl.scan_parquet(...).with_columns(...).filter(...).group_by(...).agg(...).collect().to_pandas()
scikit_lego_func(df)
```
would still be better than
```python
df = pl.read_parquet(...).with_columns(...).filter(...).group_by(...).agg(...).to_pandas()
scikit_lego_func(df)
```

To drive the second point home, here are some timings comparing running `add_lags` on a
10-million-row Polars dataframe directly, as opposed to converting to pandas and back:

- passing Polars directly to `add_lags`:  ~ 10.8 ms
- converting Polars to pandas, passing that to `add_lags`, then converting back: ~ 1.47 s

> 

Reviewer 2: Often when comparing two results, you use the same units to make it easier for the reader to compare.  Writing 1470ms would make it clear that it's almost 150x faster.

(Also, SI says no space between numbers and units, but I gave up that battle a long time ago, as long as the paper is consistent, which this is. :-) )

Note that we're dealing with purely numeric data here, so the conversion is extremely cheap.
The reason that the second approach takes over 100x longer is that Polars is generally much
faster at feature engineering than pandas. As the size of the dataframe increases, the comparison
scales even better in the "native Polars support" direction.

That's why "just convert to pandas" is a disappointing solution, and why it's worth it to
invest the time to achieve dataframe-agnosticism.

## Will the future of data science become "BYODF" (bring your own dataframe)?

Earlier this year, we saw [Great Tables announce that they are now "bring your own dataframe"](https://posit-dev.github.io/great-tables/blog/bring-your-own-df/).
Scikit-learn also supports Polars in a somewhat standardised way, by leveraging the [dataframe interchange protocol](https://data-apis.org/dataframe-protocol/latest/), the [`__array__` method](https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/basics.interoperability.html), and
some custom logic. And in this blog post, we look at how scikit-lego achieved the same by using Narwhals.

Is this a sign of what's to come? I certainly hope so. pandas is - and will very likely continue to be -

> and enormously useful tool which solves a lot of problems for a lot of real people. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
an enormously useful tool which solves a lot of problems for a lot of real people. 
```

However, if pandas remained the _only_ dataframe library supported in the data science
ecosystem, then that'd be a opportunity.

> We've looked at how scikit-lego leveraged Narwhals in order to become dataframe-agnostic. Like this, they are

Reviewer 2: "Like this" isn't right.  A tweak would be "In this way" but I'd suggest losing a few words and making these two sentences one, something like this:

We've looked at how scikit-lego leveraged Narwhals in order to become dataframe-agnostic, 
able to natively support Polars, Modin, and cuDF without adding them as dependencies.

---
title: 'How Narwhals and scikit-lego came together to achieve dataframe-agnosticism'
authors: [marco-gorelli]
published: May 26, 2024

> description: 'And how your library can become dataframe-agnostic too'

Reviewer 4: Python library? I'm thinking about this metadata in a standalone context...

```suggestion
description: 'And how your Python library can become dataframe-agnostic too'
```

category: [PyData ecosystem]
featuredImage:

>   src: /posts/scikit-lego-narwhals/scikit_lego_narwhals_handshake.png

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  src: /posts/scikit-lego-narwhals/scikit_lego_narwhals_handshake.jpg
```

  alt: 'Scikit-lego and Narwhals logos, with handshake in between'
hero:

>   imageSrc: /posts/scikit-lego-narwhals/scikit_lego_narwhals_handshake.png

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  imageSrc: /posts/scikit-lego-narwhals/scikit_lego_narwhals_handshake.jpg
```

  imageAlt: 'Scikit-lego and Narwhals logos'
---

[Scikit-lego](https://github.com/koaning/scikit-lego) is a Python project from the [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) ecosystem that contributes extra estimators for machine-learning pipelines.

> It's a relatively popular project with over 1000 Github stars and 20,000 downloads a month.

Reviewer 4: If this is a new paragraph there should be a blank new line between the two.

Author: it's the same one 😉

> It's popularity comes from industry as many of the tools that it provides aren't proven to be state-of-the-art,

Reviewer 4: startup industry?

I thought state-of-the-art and industry were nearly synonymous, hence my confusion.

Author: not sure what you're asking, sorry, could you please clarify?

Reviewer 4: > In data science, it's often the classic not-really-state-of-the-art stuff that delivers value.

I see. Is that uncontroversial? Is it so obvious to your readers that it needs no explaining? Is industry the only (or almost only) place where data science is deriving value from the tried-and-true, boring, not-hyped-up tools and methods?

Author: sure, thanks - i've reworded to not mention industry

> but fall a bit more in the 'tricks that work' category. These features include a GroupedEstimator which

Reviewer 5: scikit-lego maintainer here. May I suggest:

```suggestion
but fall a bit more in the 'tricks that work' or 'experimental with proven use case' category. These features include a GroupedEstimator which
```

which is the reason why we wanted to _experiment_ with Narwhals in the first place - the use case is very clear to us, and we are open to experiments 😁

can effectively run full pipelines split per subset, a TimeGapSplit cross validator for timeseries
that adds a gap between train and test set, and a whole suite of techniques that leverage mixture methods
for outlier detection and non-linear classification.

> Recently, because polars has been gaining traction, the library maintainers have been looking for a simple way to support multiple dataframe implementations. The project still wants to support pandas, but it would be a shame if newer dataframes couldn't be supported.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Recently, because Polars has been gaining traction, the library maintainers have been looking for a simple way to support multiple dataframe implementations. The project still wants to support pandas, but it would be a shame if newer dataframes couldn't be supported.
```

Enter narwhals. As of scikit-lego 0.9.0, you can also pass dataframes from Polars, Modin, cuDF, and in principle a whole host
of other dataframes.
But, how does it work? Why did they use Narwhals?
Why don't they just

> convert to pandas internally on the user's behalf?

Reviewer 4: What is going on with the spacing here

Author: they render as a single paragraph, which is what i was going for: https://labs-68vdxlovu-quansight.vercel.app/blog/scikit-lego-narwhals

I'd probably just moved things around

just for my understand, does it make a difference?

Reviewer 4: No, I was just double checking

1. check if the input is NumPy or a pandas dataframe
2. if it's NumPy, then perform array operations
3. if it's pandas, then perform pandas dataframe operations

In order to support Polars too, one possible solution could have been to add a fourth step to
the above:

4. if it's Polars, then perform Polars dataframe operations

This looks simple, but it actually opens up a rabbit hole of extra steps, such as:

5. if it's Modin, ...
6. if it's cuDF, ...
7. if it's fireducks, ...

In order to address all the above, scikit-lego opted for a simpler approach: use Narwhals.
The steps then become:

1. run [`narwhals.from_native`](https://narwhals-dev.github.io/narwhals/api-reference/narwhals/#narwhals.from_native) on the input
2. if it's NumPy, then perform array operations
3. otherwise, express dataframe logic using the subset of the Polars API supported by Narwhals

Like this, Narwhals takes care of translating its (Polars-like) syntax to each
supported backend. Read the [Narwhals docs](https://narwhals-dev.github.io/narwhals) for more
info on how to use it, and for a tutorial.

> ## Why not "just convert to pandas"?

Reviewer 4: I think these scare quotes are okay :)

There are different ways of converting non-pandas input to pandas. Rather than using Narwhals,
couldn't scikit-lego just have done something like:

- if the input is pandas, keep as-is
- if the input is a non-pandas dataframe, then convert to pandas

However, even in the best-case zero-copy-conversion scenario, this presents several issues:

- once the input has been converted to pandas, there's no standardised way of converting back to
  the original dataframe library.
- using pandas as an engine may be significantly slower than doing everything using the original
  dataframe

Furthermore, converting to pandas may present a cost - for example, if you start with a Polars
LazyFrame, which can run significantly faster because it delays reading data into memory and performs
[several optimisations](https://docs.pola.rs/user-guide/lazy/optimizations/),

> then you're required to call [`.collect`](https://docs.pola.rs/py-polars/html/reference/lazyframe/api/polars.LazyFrame.collect.html) on it before converting to pandas.

Reviewer 4: Is this like calling list() on an iterator?

Author: i've not heard that comparison before, but I think the analogy holds!

To drive the second point home, here are some timings comparing:

- running `add_lags` on a 10-million-row Polars dataframe directly
- converting that same dataframe to pandas and running `add_lags` on that

![with native Polars support `add_lags` takes ~ 11 ms, whereas going via pandas it
takes ~ 1470 ms. Image produced with `great-tables` package](/posts/scikit-lego-narwhals/comparison.png)

[Code to reproduce](https://gist.github.com/MarcoGorelli/1da1971063caf0b3e5133f5dfba3315b).

Note that we're dealing with purely numeric data here, so the conversion is extremely cheap.
The reason that the second approach takes over 100x longer is that Polars generally excels at
feature engineering. As the size of the dataframe increases, the comparison
scales even better in the "native Polars support" direction.

That's why "just convert to pandas" is a disappointing solution, and why it's worth it to
invest the time to achieve dataframe-agnosticism.

> ## Will the future of data science become "BYODF" (bring your own dataframe)?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Will the future of data science become BYOD (bring your own dataframe)?
```

Author: that might be more technically correct, but the great-tables blog post which introduced (as far as I know) the "byodf" acronym wrote it like that

Earlier this year, we saw [Great Tables announce that they are now "bring your own dataframe"](https://posit-dev.github.io/great-tables/blog/bring-your-own-df/).
Scikit-learn also supports Polars in a somewhat standardised way, by leveraging the [dataframe interchange protocol](https://data-apis.org/dataframe-protocol/latest/), the [`__array__` method](https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/basics.interoperability.html), and

> some custom logic. And in this blog post, we look at how scikit-lego achieved the same by using Narwhals.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
some custom logic. And in this blog post, we looked at how scikit-lego achieved the same by using Narwhals.
```

Is this a sign of what's to come? I certainly hope so. pandas is - and will very likely continue to be -
an enormously useful tool which solves a lot of problems for a lot of real people. 
However, if pandas remained the _only_ dataframe library supported in the data science
ecosystem, then that'd be a missed opportunity.

> We've looked at how scikit-lego leveraged Narwhals in order to become dataframe-agnostic,
> able to natively support Polars, Modin, and cuDF without adding them as dependencies.
> Let's hope that this is the direction that data science libraries are headed towards, and that Narwhals
> can facilitate the process.

Reviewer 4: The concluding paragraphs kind of do an odd loop/return here. I feel like you could make this concluding section stronger, but it's also not bad. I edited the last paragraph to remove some of the echo effect and for brevity.

```suggestion
Scikit-lego leveraged Narwhals in order to become dataframe-agnostic,
able to natively support Polars, Modin, and cuDF without adding them as dependencies.
Let's hope that other data science libraries do the same.
```

Author: i wasn't familiar with the term "echo effect", but I recognise it when I see it - thanks!

Reviewer 4: [I make up terms all the time](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/czi-scientific-python-mgmt/issues/88)
